---
layout: post
title:  "Few mourn the death of tax equity"
date:   2019-12-15
categories:
- Climate Change
- Finance
- Strategy
excerpt: |
  Tax credits for renewable energy are set to expire, why does no one seems to care?
---

*Note: Originally developed as a writing sample for my J-School application, hence the lack of links*

In the face of climate protests that have roiled major cities around the world, and increasingly radical proposals to address the coming climate crisis, policymakers and energy leaders seem content to discard some of the few existing supports for renewable energy in the US. Despite the current phase out of renewable energy tax credits worth more than $7B, there has been no major pushback from industry or the broader public, and no realistic policy alternatives imminent. Made possible only by the increasingly positive economics of renewable energy, this quiet inaction represents a missed opportunity by policymakers and the public to prepare for a low-carbon future.

The Production Tax Credit (PTC) and the Investment Tax Credit (ITC) are federal tax credits claimed primarily by wind and solar developers to improve the economic viability of their projects. The PTC provides credits per kilowatt-hour of production during a project’s first 10 years of operation. The ITC provides a tax credit currently worth up to 30% of the value of a project. Both were last reauthorized by Congress in 2015.

Both tax credits are generally deployed as part of tax equity financing strategies that allow project developers to raise up-front funds from companies looking to offset their tax liabilities. In return for providing upfront capital, tax equity partners receive initial cash flows and tax benefits when a project becomes operational and until the credits have been used up. The effect for a developer is to lower the cost of capital for new renewable energy projects.

This is particularly important for renewables, where economic viability is highly dependent on low cost financing due to their high up-front costs relative to natural gas or coal plants that incur ongoing fuel costs. For example, based on a recent study by the investment bank Lazard, a 1.5% increase in the cost of capital for a wind project (from 6.2% to 7.7%) would increase its levelized cost of energy from $33 to $40 per megawatt-hour, a 21% increase in overall cost. The same capital cost increase for a combined-cycle natural gas plant would only boost overall costs by 8%.

Despite the importance of these tax credits to the renewable energy industry, there has been minimal effort to re-authorize the credits following the last extension in 2015. The PTC has already begun phasing out and will be gone entirely for projects begun after the end of 2019. The ITC begins phasing out next year, dropping from its current rate of 30% to 26% for projects begun in 2020, 22% for 2021 projects and a flat 10% for projects begun after 2021.

Yet many investors and policymakers believe this withdrawal of support will not significantly impact the industry, and could even be beneficial, even if the phase out of tax credits won’t help efforts to address climate change.

For example, some investment banks and asset managers argue that tax equity creates complications in financing that limit their ongoing usefulness, especially now that renewables projects have reached cost parity with fossil fuels in some regions. In particular, because investments in tax equity require a clear view of future US tax liabilities and a high-level of financial sophistication, potential investors tend to be limited to large US banks and other financial institutions. As one managing director of a renewables-focused investment bank put it, “It would actually be better if there was no more tax equity, then we could bring in more capital from European investors.”

But for the elimination of tax equity to be good for the industry, enough new capital would need to flow in to lower rates beyond even the current subsidies. Yet project capital costs have already reached as low as 5% according to some developers. And despite recent cuts to the corporate tax rate, US banks alone are far from maxing out their theoretical demand for tax credits, with ~$61B in applicable income taxes incurred in 2018 according to the FDIC, against ~$8B in renewable energy tax credits. This indicates there is not yet a meaningful limit on capital available that the removal of tax credits will suddenly unlock.

And by keeping a 10% credit after 2021, ITC tax credits will continue to drive transaction complexity, just with fewer accompanying benefits, undermining arguments that the tax credit phase out will bring a simpler, healthier renewable energy sector.

Other developers and investors argue that there are more important political priorities for the renewable energy industry to focus on, given the current regulatory environment. For example, accelerated construction of long-distance transmission lines are a frequent lobbying item for wind developers, whose projects tend to be located far from population centers. Some solar developers cite the Section 201 tariffs levied on panel imports as a bigger near term issue than expiring subsidies. 25% tariffs have been levied on key solar components since 2017 with no relief expected from the recently announced trade deal with China. For both wind and solar developers, increased deployment of energy storage is also expected to be a key factor in utility-scale projects going forward, and federal legislators have taken up a bill that proposes to make energy storage eligible for ITCs in the future.

Given these mixed priorities, and the Trump administration’s frequent antagonism towards renewable energy, some developers and legislators are looking past the 2020 election for regulatory change, rather than defend existing industry supports. On the Columbia Energy Exchange podcast, Kathy Castor, Chair of the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis, described the importance of the next election as “vitally important from a climate point of view.”

This wait and see attitude is only made possible by one important piece of good news for renewable energy: costs have declined precipitously in recent years.

According to research by Lazard, unsubsidized costs for photovoltaic solar and onshore wind have fallen by 89% and 70% respectively over the last 10 years, with 38% and 25% cost declines since tax credits were extended in 2015. This has allowed both technologies to be cost competitive with fossil fuel generation on an unsubsidized basis. Low-end estimates of US solar and wind costs of $31 and $24 per MWh compare favorably with $122 and $41 per MWh for peaker and combined-cycle gas generation respectively, though, without accompanying energy storage, renewables lack the load profile and dispatch characteristics of those traditional sources.

This declining cost trajectory underpins the plans of many developers and investors to navigate the tax credit phase out. Their focus is on qualifying current projects for safe harbor provisions to maintain tax credits through as late as 2023, and then see how far costs have shifted by that point. Based on guidance from the IRS, projects that start “physical work of a significant nature” or that incur at least 5% of total project costs (excluding land) by the end of 2019 will be able to secure existing tax credit rates. This should prevent a steep drop-off for near-term projects, with over half of utility-scale projects through 2023 expected to take advantage of the current ITC rate, according to analysis by Wood Mackenzie. As one solar developer put it in a talk at Columbia Business School “We’re focused right now on getting our projects grandfathered in for ITC credits, even if that means buying transformer coils before we know exactly what the project specs will be. It’s tricky, but we’re confident in our ability to get through this shift.”

Overall then, renewable energy sector participants believe the disruption from the tax credit phase out can be managed. Yet this narrow confidence ignores the urgency of the broader climate situation, and the importance of renewable energy in mitigating the risk of climate change. In its latest report, the IPCC estimates that a six-fold increase in annual investment in low-carbon energy and energy efficiency (versus 2015 levels) is required to avoid warming beyond 1.5 degrees Celsius. These same estimate rely on the world reaching net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Yet the latest projections from the US Energy Information Administration expect the US to get ~39% of its energy from natural gas and ~17% from coal in 2050, with only modest increases in renewables, from ~18% today to ~31% by 2050.

This is ultimately the issue with the phase out of renewable energy tax credits. While wind and solar have reached cost competitiveness with new fossil fuel generation, there is still an enormous installed base of carbon-polluting coal and gas plants across the US. For these plants to be retired, building new renewable energy generation plus storage will need to be more economical than the marginal cost of keeping existing fossil fuel capacity running. These target economics have yet to be achieved at scale by renewables, and will only become harder with the phase out of existing renewable energy tax credits.

The same solar developer who maintained confidence in his own firm’s ability to weather the phase out freely acknowledged the danger of complacency regarding the industries progress. “We need to be doing more, faster, if we want to have any hope of mitigating the effects of climate change.” Renewable energy projects will continue to be built over the coming years in spite of the tax credit phase out, but an opportunity to take serious action against global warming is quietly being thrown away.
